HAPI is a cross-platform, device independent easily extendable API that can be
used to add haptics to an application. For information on how you are allowed
to use HAPI see the LICENSE file in the same folder as this file.

This file contains complete installation instructions for Linux, Mac and Windows.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
External Libraries:
HAPI depends on other libraries. Some of them are required for HAPI to
compile others are optional. The build system used by HAPI will detect which
libraries are installed on the system and only enable the features that the
system can support. For Windows most libraries are included. Those missing must
be downloaded, compiled and installed on the system used if that feature is
desired. The libraries used by HAPI are:
 
 Required libraries. Without these HAPI will not function.
  - pthread. Included with Windows distribution, most probably installed on
    other systems.
 
 Optional libraries, without these some features of HAPI will be disabled
 and some of the distributed examples will not work.
  - wxWidgets. Needed for one of the examples distributed. http://www.wxwidgets.org/
  - OpenGL. Installed on all systems. For those interested see http://www.opengl.org/
  - GLUT or Freeglut. Freeglut is a better choice. http://freeglut.sourceforge.net/
    Must be compiled with -fexceptions as a compiler flag to allow c++ exceptions.
    Used by one of the examples.
  - OpenHaptics, for support of devices from SensAble. Obtained through SensAble.
    OpenHaptics is not open source. http://www.sensable.com
  - DHD-API, obtained through ForceDimension. http://www.forcedimension.com
  - CHAI3D. Extra haptic rendering feature. http://www.chai3d.org
  
  Note that the haptics libraries does not exist for all operating systems.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Installation on Linux:
Currently you need to build HAPI on Linux yourself. Since you have this file
you have already obtained and unpacked the source for HAPI. To build HAPI
on Linux follow these steps.

1. Install version 2.4.7 or later of CMake. To do this on Ubuntu open a
   terminal and write:
    sudo apt-get install cmake

2. HAPI depends on other libraries. The build system used by HAPI will 
   detect which libraries are installed on the system and only enable the
   features that the system can support. If more features are desired the
   corresponding library has to be installed. Note that some libraries are
   required for HAPI to compile. See the list of external libraries in the
   beginning of this ReadMe.
   
   If DHD-API is obtained then libusb needs to be installed .
   PCISCAN_LIBRARY should also be set if the library is not found in
   default location.

   If using Ubuntu 7.10 or later, several of these libraries can be obtained
   by using the apt-get feature. In a terminal write:
    sudo apt-get update sudo apt-get install gcc g++ libglew-dev libglut \
    libglut3-dev alien

   The first two are the C++ compilers needed to compile HAPI.

   Freeglut can be obtained using the following commands:
    wget http://ovh.dl.sourceforge.net/sourceforge/freeglut/freeglut-2.4.0.tar.gz
    tar -xzvf freeglut-2.4.0.tar.gz
    cd freeglut-2.4.0
    ./configure CFLAGS="-fexceptions" CXXFLAGS="-fexceptions"
    make
    sudo make install

   HAPI support more devices but only the two mentioned are tested. See the wiki
   and/or manual for more information.

   To install libusb required by DHD-api from ForceDimension on Ubuntu do the
   following:
    sudo apt-get install libusb++-dev
   
   In version 8.04 of Ubuntu another library might need to be installed:
     sudo apt-get install libxi-dev libxmu-dev   

3. In the terminal change folder to the HAPI/build folder. Write:
    cmake .
   This will generate a make file. To use the makefile write:
    make

   HAPI will be built. When the make finished write:
    sudo make install

   HAPI libraries are now installed on your system. But there is no
   application installed that use HAPI libraries.

4. There are example applications in this distribution that use HAPI. To build
   these simply do the following:
    Change folder to HAPI/examples.
    cmake .

   To test one of the examples do the following.
    Change folder to HAPI/examples/SurfaceExample/build
    ./SurfaceExample

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Installation on Windows:
To install HAPI on Windows follow these steps:
1. Download Windows installation file from www.h3d.org.
2. Install HAPI using this file.
3. Run examples through start menu.

For information on how to build HAPI on Windows see the pdf-manual
and/or the wiki.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Installation on MacOS X:
Currently you need to build HAPI on MacOS X yourself. Since you have this
file you have already obtained and unpacked the source for HAPI. To build
HAPI on MacOS X follow these steps.
1. Install version 2.4.7 or later of CMake.
2. Install XCode. If gcc is an unrecognized command in the terminal after
   installing XCode there is a high probability that CMake will not be able to
   generate build files for gcc and/or XCode. Another version of XCode could be
   used or fix it in some other way.
3. HAPI depends on other libraries. The build system used by HAPI will 
   detect which libraries are installed on the system and only enable the
   features that the system can support. If more features are desired the
   corresponding library has to be installed. Note that some libraries are
   required for HAPI to compile. See the list of external libraries in the
   beginning of this ReadMe.
4. Generate build files for your build system using CMake. Either use the
   console version as in the guide for linux above or use the GUI version in
   which the first textbox should contain the location of the CMakeLists.txt
   file. This file is located in HAPI/build. The second box is the location
   of where the build files will be created. Use for example HAPI/build/OSX.
   Press configure, choose which system to generate build files for wait and
   press configure again until the generate button can be used. Press generate
   and then the build files will be in the choosen folder. If "Unix Makefile"
   are choosen then proceed from step 3 in the linux guide above.
5. There are example applications in this distribution that use HAPI. To build
   these use the CMakeLists.txt located in the folder HAPI/examples.

   Run any of the built examples to test your HAPI build.
